                                               Kernel Interpolation for Scalable Structured
                                                     Gaussian Processes (KISS-GP)

                                                Andrew Gordon Wilson                          Hannes Nickisch




arXiv:1503.01057v1 [cs.LG] 3 Mar 2015
                                               Carnegie Mellon University                Philips Research Hamburg
                                                 andrewgw@cs.cmu.edu                       hannes@nickisch.org


                                                                                Abstract

                                                 We introduce a new structured kernel interpolation (SKI) framework, which
                                             generalises and unifies inducing point methods for scalable Gaussian processes
                                             (GPs). SKI methods produce kernel approximations for fast computations
                                             through kernel interpolation. The SKI framework clarifies how the quality of
                                             an inducing point approach depends on the number of inducing (aka interpola-
                                             tion) points, interpolation strategy, and GP covariance kernel. SKI also provides
                                             a mechanism to create new scalable kernel methods, through choosing different
                                             kernel interpolation strategies. Using SKI, with local cubic kernel interpolation,
                                             we introduce KISS-GP, which is 1) more scalable than inducing point alterna-
                                             tives, 2) naturally enables Kronecker and Toeplitz algebra for substantial addi-
                                             tional gains in scalability, without requiring any grid data, and 3) can be used
                                             for fast and expressive kernel learning. KISS-GP costs O(n) time and storage
                                             for GP inference. We evaluate KISS-GP for kernel matrix approximation, kernel
                                             learning, and natural sound modelling.



                                        1    Introduction

                                        Gaussian processes (GPs) are exactly the types of models we want to apply to big data:
                                        flexible function approximators, capable of using the information in large datasets
                                        to learn intricate structure through interpretable and expressive covariance kernels.
                                        However, O(n3 ) and O(n2 ) computation and storage requirements limit GPs to all
                                        but the smallest datasets, containing at most a few thousand training points n. Their
                                        impressive empirical successes thus far are only a glimpse of what might be possible,
                                        if only we could overcome these computational limitations (Rasmussen, 1996).
                                        Inducing point methods (Snelson and Ghahramani, 2006; Hensman et al., 2013;
                                        Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen, 2005; Seeger, 2005; Smola and Bartlett, 2001;

                                                                                     1
Silverman, 1985) have been introduced to scale up Gaussian processes to larger data-
sizes. These methods cost O(m2 n + m3 ) computations and O(mn + m2 ) storage, for
m inducing points, and n training data points. Inducing methods are popular for their
general purpose “out of the box” applicability, without requiring any special structure
in the data. However, these methods are limited by requiring a small m  n number
of inducing inputs, which can cause a deterioration in predictive performance, and the
inability to perform expressive kernel learning (Wilson et al., 2014).
Structure exploiting approaches for scalability, such as Kronecker (Saatchi, 2011) or
Toeplitz (Cunningham et al., 2008) methods, have orthogonal advantages to inducing
point methods. These methods exploit the existing structure in the covariance kernel
for highly accurate and scalable inference, and can be used for flexible kernel learning
on large datasets (Wilson et al., 2014). However, Kronecker methods require that in-
puts (predictors) are on a multidimensional lattice (a Cartesian product grid), which
makes them inapplicable to most datasets. Although Wilson et al. (2014) has extended
Kronecker methods for partial grid structure, these extensions do not apply to arbitrar-
ily located inputs. Likewise, the Kronecker based approach in Luo and Duraiswami
(2013) involves costly rank-1 updates and is not generally applicable for arbitrarily
located inputs. Toeplitz methods are similarly restrictive, requiring that the data are
on a regularly spaced 1D grid.
It is tempting to assume we could place inducing points on a grid, and then take advan-
tage of Kronecker or Toeplitz structure for further gains in scalability. However, this
naive approach only helps reduce the m3 complexity term in inducing point methods,
and not the more critical m2 n term, which arises from a matrix of cross covariances
between training and inducing inputs.
In this paper, we introduce a new unifying framework for inducing point methods,
called structured kernel interpolation (SKI). This framework allows us to improve the
scalability and accuracy of fast kernel methods, and to naturally combine the advan-
tages of inducing point and structure exploiting approaches. In particular,
   • We show how current inducing point methods can be interpreted as performing
     a global GP interpolation on a true underlying kernel to create an approximate
     kernel for scalable computations, as part of a more general family of structured
     kernel interpolation methods.
   • The SKI framework helps us understand how the accuracy and efficiency of an
     inducing point method is affected by the number of inducing points m, the choice
     of kernel, and the choice of interpolation method. Moreover, by choosing different
     interpolation strategies for SKI, we can create new inducing point methods.
   • We introduce a new inducing point method, KISS-GP, which uses local cubic
     and inverse distance weighting interpolation strategies to create a sparse approx-
     imation to the cross covariance matrix between the inducing points and original
     training points. This method can naturally be combined with Kronecker and

                                           2
      Toeplitz algebra to allow for m  n inducing points, and further gains in scal-
      ability. When exploiting Toeplitz structure KISS-GP requires O(n + m log m)
      computations and O(n + m) storage. When exploiting Kronecker structure,
      KISS-GP requires O(n + P m1+1/P ) computations and O(n + P m2/P ) storage,
      for P > 1 dimensional inputs.
    • KISS-GP can be viewed as lifting the grid restrictions in Toeplitz and Kronecker
      methods, so that one can use arbitrarily located inputs.
    • We show that the ability for KISS-GP to efficiently use a large number of induc-
      ing points enables expressive kernel learning, and orders of magnitude greater
      accuracy and efficiency over popular alternatives such as FITC (Snelson and
      Ghahramani, 2006).
    • We have implemented code as an extension to the GPML toolbox (Rasmussen
      and Nickisch, 2010).
    • Overall, the simplicity and generality of the SKI framework makes it easy to
      design scalable Gaussian process methods with high accuracy and low computa-
      tional costs.
We start in section 2 with background on Gaussian processes (section 2.1), induc-
ing point methods (section 2.2), and structure exploiting methods (section 2.3). We
then introduce the structured kernel interpolation (SKI) framework, and the KISS-GP
method, in section 3. In section 4 we conduct experiments on kernel matrix recon-
struction, kernel learning, and natural sound modelling. We conclude in section 5.


2     Background

2.1    Gaussian Processes

We provide a brief review of Gaussian processes (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006), and
the associated computational requirements for inference and learning. Throughout we
assume we have a dataset D of n input (predictor) vectors X = {x1 , . . . , xn }, each of
dimension D, corresponding to a n × 1 vector of targets y = (y(x1 ), . . . , y(xn ))> .
A Gaussian process (GP) is a collection of random variables, any finite number of
which have a joint Gaussian distribution. Using a GP, we can define a distribution
over functions f (x) ∼ GP(µ, k), meaning that any collection of function values f has
a joint Gaussian distribution:
                     f = f (X) = [f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn )]> ∼ N (µ, K) .            (1)
The n × 1 mean vector µi = µ(xi ), and n × n covariance matrix Kij = k(xi , xj ),
are defined by the user specified mean function µ(x) = E[f (x)] and covariance kernel

                                              3
k(x, x0 ) = cov(f (x), f (x0 )) of the Gaussian process. The smoothness and generalisation
properties of the GP are encoded by the covariance kernel and its hyperparameters θ.
For example, the popular RBF covariance function, with length-scale hyperparameter
`, has the form
                           kRBF (x, x0 ) = exp(−0.5||x − x0 ||2 /`2 ) .                (2)

If the targets y(x) are modelled by a GP with additive Gaussian noise, e.g., y(x)|f (x) ∼
N (y(x); f (x), σ 2 ), the predictive distribution at n∗ test points X∗ is given by

                     f ∗ |X∗ ,X, y, θ, σ 2 ∼ N (f̄ ∗ , cov(f ∗ )) ,                     (3)
                           f̄ ∗ = µX∗ + KX∗ ,X [KX,X + σ 2 I]−1 y ,
                    cov(f ∗ ) = KX∗ ,X∗ − KX∗ ,X [KX,X + σ 2 I]−1 KX,X∗ .

KX∗ ,X , for example, denotes the n∗ ×n matrix of covariances between the GP evaluated
at X∗ and X. µX∗ is the n∗ × 1 mean vector, and KX,X is the n × n covariance matrix
evaluated at training inputs X. All covariance matrices implicitly depend on the kernel
hyperparameters θ.
We can analytically marginalise the Gaussian process f (x) to obtain the marginal
likelihood of the data, conditioned only on the covariance hyperparameters θ:
                                         model fit       complexity penalty
                                 z      }|         { z       }|       {
                  log p(y|θ) ∝ −[y> (Kθ + σ 2 I)−1 y + log |Kθ + σ 2 I|] .              (4)

Eq. (4) nicely separates into automatically calibrated model fit and complexity terms
(Rasmussen and Ghahramani, 2001), and can be optimized to learn the kernel hyper-
parameters θ, or used to integrate out θ via MCMC (Rasmussen, 1996).
The computational bottleneck in using Gaussian processes is solving a linear system
(K + σ 2 I)−1 y (for inference), and log |K + σ 2 I| (for hyperparameter learning). For this
purpose, standard procedure is to compute the Cholesky decomposition of K, requiring
O(n3 ) operations and O(n2 ) storage. Afterwards, the predictive mean and variance
respectively cost O(n) and O(n2 ) for a single test point x∗ .


2.2    Inducing Point Based Sparse Approximations

Many popular approaches to scaling up GP inference belong to a family of induc-
ing point methods (Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen, 2005). These methods can
be viewed as replacing the exact kernel k(x, z) by an approximation k̃(x, z) for fast
computations.
For example, the prominent subset of regressors (SoR) (Silverman, 1985) and fully
independent training conditional (FITC) (Snelson and Ghahramani, 2006) methods

                                              4
use the approximate kernels
                                        −1
                   k̃SoR (x, z) = Kx,U KU,U KU,z ,                                       (5)
                                                                               
                 k̃FITC (x, z) = k̃SoR (x, z) + δxz       k(x, z) − k̃SoR (x, z) ,       (6)

                                                            −1
for a set of m inducing points U = [ui ]i=1...m . Kx,U , KU,U  , and KU,z are generated
from the exact kernel k(x, z). While SoR yields an n × n covariance matrix KSoR of
rank at most m, corresponding to a degenerate (finite basis) Gaussian process, FITC
leads to a full rank covariance matrix KFITC due to its diagonal correction. As a result,
FITC is a more faithful approximation and is preferred in practice. Note that the exact
user-specified kernel, k(x, z), will be parametrized by θ, and therefore kernel learning
in an inducing point method takes place by, e.g., optimizing the SoR or FITC marginal
likelihoods with respect to θ.
These approximate kernels give rise to O(m2 n + m3 ) computations and O(mn + m2 )
storage for GP inference and learning (Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen, 2005), after
which the GP predictive mean and variance cost O(m) and O(m2 ) per test case. To
see practical efficiency gains over standard inference procedures, one is constrained to
choose m  n, which often leads to a severe deterioration in predictive performance,
and an inability to perform expressive kernel learning (Wilson et al., 2014).


2.3     Fast Structure Exploiting Inference

Kronecker and Toeplitz methods exploit the existing structure of the GP covariance
matrix K to scale up inference and learning without approximations.


2.3.1   Kronecker Methods

We briefly review Kronecker methods. A full introduction is provided in chapter 5 of
Saatchi (2011).
If we have multidimensional inputs on a CartesianQgrid, x ∈ X1 × · · · × XP , and a
                                                              (p) (p)
product kernel across grid dimensions, k(xi , xj ) = Pp=1 k(xi , xj ), then the m × m
                                   Q as a Kronecker product K = K1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ KP
covariance matrix K can be expressed
(the number of grid points m = Pi=1 np is a product of the number of points np
per grid dimension). It follows that we can efficiently find the eigendecomposition of
K = QV Q> by separately computing the eigendecomposition of each of K1 , . . . , KP .
One can similarly exploit Kronecker structure for fast matrix vector products (Wilson
et al., 2014).
Fast eigendecompositions and matrix vector products of Kronecker matrices allow us to
efficiently evaluate (K + σ 2 I)−1 y and log |K + σ 2 I| for scalable and exact inference and

                                               5
learning with GPs. Specifically, given an eigendecomposition of K as QV Q> , we can
               2 −1
write
P (K + σ I)         y = (QV Q> + σ 2 I)−1 y = Q(V + σ 2 I)−1 Q> y, and log |K + σ 2 I| =
                2
   i log(Vii + σ ). V is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues, so inversion is trivial. Q,
an orthogonal matrix of eigenvectors, also decomposes as a Kronecker product, which
enables fast matrix vector products. Overall, inference and learning cost O(P m1+1/P )
                                   2
operations (for P > 1) and O(P m P ) storage (Saatchi, 2011; Wilson et al., 2014).

While product kernels can be easily constructed, and popular kernels such as the RBF
kernel of Eq. (2) already have product structure, requiring a multidimensional input
grid can be a severe constraint.

Wilson et al. (2014) extend Kronecker methods to datasets with only partial grid struc-
ture – e.g., images with random missing pixels, or spatiotemporal grids with missing
data due to water. They complete a partial grid with virtual observations, and use a
diagonal noise covariance matrix A which ignores the effects of these virtual observa-
tions: K (n) + σ 2 I → K (m) + A, where K (n) is an n × n covariance matrix formed from
the original dataset with n datapoints, and K (m) is the covariance matrix after augmen-
tation from virtual inputs. Although we cannot efficiently eigendecompose K (m) + A,
we can take matrix vector products (K (m) + A)y(m) efficiently, since K (m) is Kronecker
and A is diagonal. We can thus compute (K (m) + A)−1 y(m) = (K (n) + σ 2 I)−1 y(n) to
within machine precision, and perform efficient inference, using iterative methods such
as linear conjugate gradients, which only involve matrix vector products.

To evaluate the marginal likelihood in Eq. (4), for kernel learning, we must also com-
pute log |K (n) +σ 2 I|, where K (n) is an n×n covariance matrix formed from the original
dataset with n datapoints. Wilson et al. (2014) propose to approximate the eigenval-
      (n)
ues λi of K (n) using the largest n eigenvalues λi of K (m) , the Kronecker covariance
matrix formed from the completed grid, which can be eigendecomposed efficiently. In
particular,

                                        n                        n
                                        X          (n)
                                                                 X            n
              log |K   (n)      2
                             + σ I| =         log(λi + σ 2 ) ≈         log(     λi + σ 2 ) .
                                        i=1                      i=1
                                                                              m

Theorem 3.4 of Baker (1977) proves this eigenvalue approximation is asymptotically
consistent (e.g., converges in the limit of large n), so long as the observed inputs are
bounded by the complete grid. Williams and Shawe-Taylor (2003) also show that one
can bound the true eigenvalues by their approximation using PCA. Notably, only the
log determinant (complexity penalty) term in the marginal likelihood undergoes a small
approximation. Wilson et al. (2014) show that, in practice, this approximation can be
highly effective for fast and expressive kernel learning.

However, the extensions in Wilson et al. (2014) are only efficient if the input space has
partial grid structure, and do not apply in general settings.

                                                    6
2.3.2    Toeplitz Methods

Toeplitz and Kronecker methods are complementary. K is a Toeplitz covariance matrix
if it is generated from a stationary covariance kernel, k(x, x0 ) = k(x − x0 ), with inputs
x on a regularly spaced one dimensional grid. Toeplitz matrices are constant along
their diagonals: Ki,j = Ki+1,j+1 = k(xi − xj ).
One can embed Toeplitz matrices into circulant matrices, to perform fast matrix vector
products using fast Fourier transforms, e.g., Wilson (2014). One can then use linear
conjugate gradients to solve linear systems (K + σ 2 I)−1 y in O(m log m) operations and
O(m) storage, for m grid datapoints. Turner (2010) and Cunningham et al. (2008)
contain examples of Toeplitz methods applied to GPs.



3       Structured Kernel Interpolation

We wish to ease the large O(n3 ) computations and O(n2 ) storage associated with
Gaussian processes, while retaining model flexibility and general applicability.
Inducing point approaches (section 2.2) to scalability are popular because they can be
applied “out of the box”, without requiring special structure in the data. However,
with a small number of inducing points, these methods suffer from a major deterio-
ration in predictive accuracy, and the inability to perform expressive kernel learning
(Wilson et al., 2014), which will be most valuable on large datasets. On the other hand,
structure exploiting approaches (section 2.3) are compelling because they provide in-
credible gains in scalability, with essentially no losses in predictive accuracy. But the
requirement of an input grid makes these methods inapplicable to most problems.
Looking at equations (5) and (6), it is tempting to try placing the locations of the
inducing points U on a grid, in the SoR or FITC methods, and then exploit either
                                                                             −1
Kronecker or Toeplitz algebra to efficiently solve linear systems involving KU,U . While
                                            3                                −1
this naive approach would reduce the O(m ) complexity associated with KU,U , that is
not the dominant term for computations with inducing point methods – rather, it is
                                                                 −1
the O(m2 n) computations associated with the product KX,U KU,U      .
We observe, however, that we can approximate the n × m matrix KX,U of cross co-
variances for the kernel evaluated at the training and inducing inputs X and U , by
interpolating on the m × m covariance matrix KU,U . For example, if we wish to esti-
mate k(xi , uj ), for input point xi and inducing point uj , we can start by finding the
two inducing points ua and ub which most closely bound xi : ua ≤ xi ≤ ub (initially
assuming D = 1 and a Toeplitz KU,U from a regular grid U , for simplicity). We can
then form k̃(xi , uj ) = wi k(ua , uj ) + (1 − wi )k(ub , uj ), with linear interpolation weights
wi and (1 − wi ), which represent the relative distances from xi to points ua and ub .

                                               7
More generally, we form

                                        KX,U ≈ W KU,U ,                                          (7)

where W is an n × m matrix of interpolation weights. We observe that W can be
extremely sparse. For local linear interpolation, W contains only c = 2 non-zero
entries per row – the interpolation weights – which sum to 1. For greater accuracy, we
can use local cubic interpolation (Keys, 1981) on equispaced grids, in which case W
has c = 4 non-zero entries per row. For general rectilinear grids U (without regular
spacing), we can use inverse distance weighting (Shepard, 1968) with c = 2 non-zero
weights per row of W .
Substituting our expression for K̃X,U in Eq. (7) into the SoR approximation for KX,X ,
we find:
                          SoR                    Eq. (7)
                                −1                             −1
                   KX,X ≈ KX,U KU,U KU,X             ≈ W KU,U KU,U KU,U W >
                          = W KU,U W > = KSKI .                                                  (8)

We name this general approach to approximating GP kernel functions structured kernel
interpolation (SKI). Although we have made use of the SoR approximation as an
example, SKI can be applied to essentially any inducing point method, such as FITC.1,2
We can compute fast matrix vector products KSKI y. If we do not exploit Toeplitz or
Kronecker structure in KU,U , a matrix vector product costs O(n + m2 ) computations
and O(n + m2 ) storage (matrix vector products with KU,U cost O(m2 ) computations,
and with sparse W cost O(n), with the same storage requirements). If we exploit
                                                                                  2
Kronecker structure, we only require O(P m1+1/P ) computations and O(n + P m P )
storage (matrix vector products with KU,U now cost O(P m1+1/P ) computations and
       2
O(P m P ) storage). If we exploit Toeplitz structure, we only require O(n + m log m)
computations and O(n + m) storage (a matrix vector product with KU,U now costs
O(m log m) computations and O(m) storage).
                                  −1
Inference proceeds by solving KSKI   y through linear conjugate gradients, which only
requires matrix vector products and a small number j  n of iterations for conver-
gence to within machine precision. To compute log |KSKI |, for the marginal likelihood
evaluations used in kernel learning, one can follow the approximation of Wilson et al.
(2014), described in section 2.3.1, where KU,U takes the role of K (m) , and virtual ob-
servations are not required. Alternatively, we can use the ability to take fast matrix
vector products with KSKI in standard eigenvalue solvers to efficiently compute the log
determinant exactly. We can also form an accurate approximation by selectively com-
puting the largest and smallest eigenvalues. This alternative approach is not possible in
   1
     Combining with the SoR approximate k(x, z), one can naively use kSKI (x, z) = w>
                                                                                    x KU,U wz , where
wx , wz ∈ Rm are interpolation vectors for points x and z; however, when wx 6= wz , it makes most
sense to perform local interpolation on KU,z directly.
   2
     Later we discuss the logistics of combining with FITC.


                                                 8
Wilson et al. (2014) since in that case one cannot take fast matrix vector products with
K (n) . In either fast approach, the computional complexity for learning is no greater
than for inference.
In short, even if we choose not to exploit potential Kronecker or Toeplitz structure
in KU,U , inference and learning in SKI are accelerated over standard inducing point
approaches. However, unlike with the data inputs, X, which are fixed, we are free to
choose the locations of the latent inducing points U , and therefore we can easily create
(e.g., Toeplitz or Kronecker) structure in KU,U which might not exist in KX,X . In the
SKI formalism, we can uniquely exploit this structure for substantial additional gains
in efficiency, and the ability to use an unprecedented number of inducing points, while
lifting any grid requirements for the training inputs X.
Although here we have made use of the SoR approximation in Eq. (8), we could trivially
apply the FITC diagonal correction (section 2.2), or combine with other approaches.
However, within the SKI framework, the diagonal correction of FITC does not have as
much value: KSKI can easily be full rank and still have major computational benefits,
using m > n. In conventional inducing approximations, one would never set m > n,
since this would be less efficient than exact Gaussian process inference.
Finally, we can understand all of these inducing approaches as part of a general struc-
tured kernel interpolation (SKI) framework. The predictive mean f¯∗ in Eq. (3) of a
noise-free, zero mean GP (σ = 0, µ(x) ≡ 0) is linear in two ways: on the one hand, as
                −1
a wX (x∗ ) = KX,X  KX,x∗ weighted sum of the observations y, and on the other hand as
           −1
an α = KX,X y weighted sum of training-test cross-covariances KX,x∗ :

                              f¯∗ = y> wX (x∗ ) = α> KX,x∗ .                           (9)

If we are to perform a noise free zero-mean GP regression on the kernel itself, such that
we have data D = (ui , k(ui , x))m
                                 i=1 , then we recover the SoR kernel k̃SoR (x, z) of equa-
tion (5) as the predictive mean of the GP at test point x∗ = z. This finding provides
a new unifying perspective on inducing point approaches: all conventional inducing
point methods, such as SoR and FITC, can be re-derived as performing a zero-mean
Gaussian process interpolation on the true kernel. Indeed, we could write interpolation
points instead of inducing points. The n × m interpolation weight matrix W , in all
conventional cases, will have all non-zero entries, which incurs great computational
expenses. And, computional considerations aside, it is not ideal for inducing point
methods to perform a zero-mean GP regression on a covariance kernel. For example,
since popular kernels are often strictly positive – neither zero-mean, nor accurately
characterized by a Gaussian distribution – conventional inducing point methods will
tend to underestimate covariances.
The SKI interpretation of inducing point methods provides a mechanism to create
new inducing point approaches. By replacing global GP kernel interpolation with
local inverse distance weighting or cubic interpolation, as part of our SKI framework,

                                            9
we make W extremely sparse. We illustrate the differences between local and global
kernel interpolation in Figure 1. In addition to the sparsity in W , this interpolation
perspective naturally enables us to exploit (e.g., Toeplitz or Kronecker) structure in
the kernel for further gains in scalability, without requiring that the inputs X (which
index the targets y) are on a grid.

                  1                                                         1
                                              k                                                          k
                                              k(U,u)                                                     k(U,u)
                 0.75                         Global                       0.75                          Local




    Covariance                                                Covariance
                                              kSoR(x,u)                                                  kSKI(x,u)

                 0.5                                                       0.5


                 0.25                                                      0.25


                  0                                                         0
                       0     2.5 x    5      7.5        10                       0      2.5 x    5      7.5       10

                      (a) Global Kernel Interpolation                            (b) Local Kernel Interpolation

Figure 1: Global vs. local kernel interpolation. Triangle markers denote the inducing
points used for interpolating k(x, u) from k(U, u). Here u = 0, U = {0, 1, . . . , 10},
and x = 3.4. a) All conventional inducing point methods, such as SoR or FITC,
perform global GP regression on KU,u (a vector of covariances between all inducing
points U and the point u), at test point x∗ = x, to form an approximate k̃, e.g.,
                    −1
kSoR (x, u) = Kx,U KU,U KU,u , for any desired x and u. b) SKI can perform local kernel
interpolation on KU,u to form the approximation kSKI (x, u) = w> x KU,u .


This unifying perspective of inducing methods as kernel interpolation also clarifies when
these approaches will perform best. The key assumption, in all of these approaches, is
smoothness in the true underlying kernel k. We can expect interpolation approaches
to work well on popular kernels, such as the RBF kernel, which is a simple exponential
function. More expressive kernels, such as the spectral mixture kernel (Wilson and
Adams, 2013), will require more inducing (interpolation) points for a good approxima-
tion, due to their quasi-periodic nature. It is our contention that the loss in accuracy
going from, e.g., global GP kernel interpolation to local cubic kernel interpolation is
more than recovered by the subsequent ability to greatly increase the number of in-
ducing points. Moreover, we believe the structure of most popular kernel functions is
conducive to local versus global interpolation, resulting in a strong approximation with
greatly improved scalability.
When combining SKI with i) GPs, ii) sparse (e.g. cubic) interpolation, and iii) Kro-
necker or Toeplitz algebra, we name the resulting method KISS-GP, though in the
experiments of section 4 we will typically write, e.g., “SKI with cubic interpolation”.
We also use the terms inducing points and interpolation points interchangeably.

                                                             10
4     Experiments
We evaluate SKI for kernel matrix approximation (section 4.1), kernel learning (section
4.2), and natural sound modelling (section 4.3).
We particularly compare with FITC (Snelson and Ghahramani, 2006), because 1)
FITC is the most popular inducing point approach, 2) FITC has been shown to have
superior predictive performance and similar efficiency to other inducing methods, and
is generally recommended (Naish-Guzman and Holden, 2007; Quinonero-Candela et al.,
2007), and 3) FITC is well understood, and thus FITC comparisons help elucidate the
fundamental properties of SKI, which is our primary goal. However, we also provide
comparisons with SoR, and SSGPR (Lázaro-Gredilla et al., 2010), a recent state of the
art scalable GP method based on random projections with O(m2 n) computations and
O(m2 ) storage for m basis functions and n training points (see also Rahimi and Recht,
2007; Le et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2014).
Furthermore, we focus on the ability for SKI to allow a relaxation of Kronecker and
Toeplitz methods to arbitrarily located inputs. Since Toeplitz methods are restricted
to 1D inputs, and Kronecker methods can only be used for low dimensional (D < 5)
input spaces (Saatchi, 2011), we consider lower dimensional problems.
All experiments were performed on a 2011 MacBook Pro, with an Intel i5 2.3 GHz
processor and 4 GB of RAM.


4.1    Covariance Matrix Reconstruction

Accurate inference and learning depends on the GP covariance matrix K, which is used
to form the predictive distribution and marginal likelihood of a Gaussian process. We
evaluate the SKI approximation to K, in Eq. (8), as a function of number of inducing
points m, inducing point locations, and sparse interpolation strategy.
We generate a 1000×1000 covariance matrix K from an RBF kernel (Eq. (2)) evaluated
at (sorted) inputs X randomly sampled from N (0, 25), shown in Figure 2(a). Note that
the inputs have no grid structure. The approximate K produced by SKI using local
cubic interpolation and only 40 interpolation points, shown in Figure 2(b), is almost
indistinguishable from the original K. Figure 2(c) illustrates |K − KSKI, m=40 |, the
absolute difference between the matrices in Figures 2(a) and 2(b). The approximation
is generally accurate, with greatest precision near the diagonals and outer edges of K.
In Figure 2(d), we show how reconstruction error varies as a function of inducing points
and interpolation strategy. Local cubic and linear interpolation, using regular grids,
are shown in blue and purple, respectively. Cubic interpolation is significantly more
accurate for a small number of inducing points m. In black, we also show the accuracy
of using k-means on the data inputs X to choose inducing point locations. In this case,

                                          11
                                                                                                                                                                      −5
                                                                                                                                                               x 10
                                               1                                                            1

   200                                         0.8      200                                                 0.8         200                                    15

   400                                         0.6      400                                                 0.6         400
                                                                                                                                                               10
   600                                         0.4      600                                                 0.4         600
                                                                                                                                                               5
   800                                         0.2      800                                                 0.2         800

 1000                                                 1000                                                             1000
                200   400   600   800   1000                           200    400    600     800     1000                       200   400   600   800   1000


                      (a) Ktrue                                        (b) KSKI (m = 40)                                      (c) |Ktrue − KSKI, 40 |
                                                                                                                  −8                                                  −8
                                                                                                            x 10                                               x 10
          0.1
                                                                                                                                                               14
                            equi−linear                                                                     4
         0.08                                           200                                                            200                                     12
                            kmeans−linear
                            equi−GP                                                                                                                            10

 Error
         0.06                                           400                                                 3          400
                            equi−cubic                                                                                                                         8
         0.04                                                                                               2                                                  6
                                                        600                                                            600
         0.02                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                        800                                                 1          800
                                                                                                                                                               2
           0
           10          15         20           25     1000                                                             1000
                            m                                          200    400    600     800 1000                           200   400   600   800 1000

     (d) Interpolation Strategies                                 (e) |Ktrue − KSKI, 150 |                                    (f) |Ktrue − KSoR, 150 |

                                                              −4
                                                             10
                                                                                         SKI (linear)
                                                              −6
                                                                                         SoR
                                                             10                          FITC
                                                     Error
                                                                                         SKI (cubic)
                                                              −8
                                                             10


                                                              −10
                                                             10
                                                                   0         0.1     0.2       0.3      0.4
                                                                              Runtime (s)
                                                                  (g) Error vs Runtime

Figure 2: Reconstructing a covariance matrix. a) True 1000 × 1000 RBF covariance
matrix K. b) KSKI reconstruction using local cubic interpolation and m = 40 interpo-
lation points. c) SKI absolute reconstruction error, for m = 40. d) Average absolute
error for reconstructing each entry of K (the average of entries in (c)) as a function
of m, using a regular grid with linear, cubic and GP interpolation (purple, blue, and
red, respectively), and an irregular grid formed through k-means, with inverse distance
weighting interpolation (black). e)-f) SKI (cubic) and SoR absolute reconstruction er-
ror, for m = 150. g) Average absolute (log scale) error vs runtime, for m ∈ [500, 2000].


we use local inverse distance weighting interpolation, a type of linear interpolation
which applies to irregular grids. This k-means strategy improves upon standard linear
interpolation on a regular grid by choosing the inducing points which will be closest
to the original inputs. However, the value of using k-means decreases when we are
allowed more interpolation points, since the precise locations of these interpolation

                                                                                    12
points then becomes less critical, so long as we have general coverage of the input
domain. Indeed, except for small m, cubic interpolation on a regular grid generally
outperforms inverse distance weighting with k-means. Unsurprisingly, SKI with global
GP kernel interpolation (shown in red), which corresponds to the SoR approximation,
is much more accurate than the other interpolation strategies for very small m  n.
However, global GP kernel interpolation is much less efficient than local cubic kernel
interpolation, and these accuracy differences quickly shrink with increases in m. Indeed
in Figures 2(e) and 2(f) we see both reconstruction errors are similarly small for m =
150, but qualitatively different. The error in the SoR reconstruction is concentrated
near the diagonal, whereas the error in SKI with cubic interpolation never reaches the
top errors in SoR, and is more accurate than SoR near the diagonal, but is also more
diffuse. This finding suggests that combining cubic interpolation with GP interpolation
could improve accuracy, if we account for the regions where each is strongest.
Ultimately, however, the important question is not which approximation is most ac-
curate for a given m, but which approximation is most accurate for a given runtime
(Chalupka et al., 2013). In Figure 2(g) we compare the accuracies and runtimes for
SoR, FITC, and SKI with local linear and local cubic interpolation, for m ∈ [500, 2000]
at m = 150 unit increments. m is sufficiently large that the differences in accuracy
between SoR and FITC are negligible. In general, the difference in going from SKI
with global GP interpolation (e.g., SoR or FITC) to SKI with local cubic interpola-
tion (KISS-GP) is much more profound than the differences between SoR and FITC.
Moreover, moving from local linear interpolation to local cubic interpolation provides
a great boost in accuracy without noticeably affecting runtime. We also see that SKI
with local interpolation quickly picks up accuracy with increases in m, with local cubic
interpolation actually surpassing SoR and FITC in accuracy for a given m. Most im-
portantly, for any given runtime, SKI with cubic interpolation is more accurate than
the alternatives.
In this experiment we are testing the error and runtime for constructing an approximate
covariance matrix, but we are not yet performing inference with that covariance matrix,
which is typically much more expensive, and where SKI will help the most. Moreover,
we are not yet using Kronecker or Toeplitz structure to accelerate SKI.


4.2    Kernel Learning

We now test the ability for SKI to learn kernels from data using Gaussian processes. In-
deed, SKI is intended to scale Gaussian processes to large datasets – and large datasets
provide a distinct opportunity to discover rich statistical representations through kernel
learning.
Popular inducing point methods, such as FITC, improve the scalability of Gaussian
processes. However, Wilson et al. (2014) showed that these methods cannot typically

                                           13
be used for expressive kernel learning, and are most suited to simple smoothing kernels.
In other words, these scalable GP methods often miss out on structure learning, one of
the greatest motivations for considering large datasets in the first place. This limitation
arises because popular inducing methods require that the number of inducing points
m  n, for computational tractability, which deprives us of the necessary information
to learn intricate kernels. SKI does not suffer from this problem, since we are free to
choose large m; in fact, m can be greater than n, while retaining significant efficiency
gains over standard GPs.
To test SKI and FITC for kernel learning, we sample data from a GP which uses
a known ground truth kernel, and then attempt to learn this kernel from the data.
In particular, we sample n = 10, 000 datapoints y from a Gaussian process with an
intricate product kernel ktrue = k1 k2 queried at inputs x ∈ R2 drawn from N (0, 4I) (the
inputs have no grid structure). Each component kernel in the product operates on a
separate input dimension, as shown in green in Figure 3. Incidentally, n = 104 points is
about the upper limit of what we can sample from a multivariate Gaussian distribution
with a non-trivial covariance matrix. Even a single sample from a GP with this many
datapoints together with this sophisticated kernel is computationally intensive, taking
1030 seconds in this instance. On the other hand, SKI can enable one to efficiently
sample from extremely high dimensional (n > 1010 ) non-trivial multivariate Gaussian
distributions, which could be generally useful.3
To learn the kernel underlying the data, we optimize the SKI and FITC marginal
likelihoods of a Gaussian process p(y|θ) with respect to the hyperparameters θ of a
spectral mixture kernel, using non-linear conjugate gradients. In other words, the SKI
and FITC kernels approximate a user specified (e.g., spectral mixture) kernel which is
parametrized by θ, and to perform kernel learning we wish to learn θ from the data.
Spectral mixture kernels (Wilson and Adams, 2013) form a basis for all stationary
covariance kernels, and are well-equipped for kernel learning. For SKI, we use cubic
interpolation and a 100 × 100 inducing point grid, equispaced in each input dimension.
That is, we have as many inducing points m = 10, 000 as we have training datapoints.
We use the same hyperparameter initialisation for each approach.
The results are shown in Figures 3(a) and 3(b). The true kernels are in green, the SKI
reconstructions in blue, and the FITC reconstructions in red. SKI provides a strong
approximation, whereas FITC is unable to come near to reconstructing the true kernel.
In this multidimensional example, SKI leverages Kronecker structure for efficiency, and
has a runtime of 2400 seconds (0.67 hours), using m = 10, 000 inducing points. FITC,
on the other hand, has a runtime of 2.6 × 104 seconds (7.2 hours), with only m = 100
inducing points. More inducing points with FITC breaks computational tractibility.
Even though the locations of the training points are randomly sampled, in SKI we
exploited the Kronecker structure in the covariance matrix KU,U over the inducing
  3
      Sampling would proceed, e.g., via WSKI [chol(K1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ chol(Kp )]ν,   ν ∼ N (0, I).


                                                     14
                            1
                                        True
                                        FITC                      0.8




            Correlation                            Correlation
                           0.5          SKI                       0.6

                                                                  0.4
                            0                                     0.2

                                                                   0
                          −0.5                                   −0.2
                              0   0.5          1                     0   0.5   1
                                  τ                                      τ

Figure 3: Kernel Learning. A product of two kernels (shown in green) was used to
sample 10, 000 datapoints from a GP. From this data, we performed kernel learning
using SKI (cubic) and FITC, with the results shown in blue and red, respectively. All
kernels are a function of τ = x − x0 and are scaled by k(0).

points U , to reduce the cost of using 10, 000 inducing points to less than the cost of
using 100 inducing points with FITC. FITC, and alternative inducing point methods,
cannot effectively exploit Kronecker structure, because the non-sparse cross-covariance
matrices KX,U and KU,X limit scaling to at best O(m2 n), as per section 3.


4.3    Natural Sound Modelling

In section 4.2 we exploited multidimensional Kronecker structure in the SKI covariance
matrix KU,U for scalability. For targets indexed by a set of 1D inputs, such as time
series, we cannot exploit Kronecker structure for computational savings. However, by
placing the inducing points on a regular grid, we can create Toeplitz structure (section
2.3.2) in KU,U which can be effectively exploited by SKI for additional scalability, but
not by popular alternatives.
Gaussian processes have been successfully applied to natural sound modelling, with a
view towards automatic speech recognition, and a deeper understanding of auditory
processing in the brain (Turner, 2010). We use SKI to model the natural sound time
series in Figure 4(a), considered in a different context by Turner (2010). We trained
a full Gaussian process on a subset of the data, learning the hyperparameters of an
RBF kernel, for use with both FITC and SKI. We then used each of these methods to
reconstruct large contiguous missing regions in the signal. This time series does not
have input grid structure due to the high number of large arbitrarily located missing
regions, and therefore direct Toeplitz methods cannot be applied. In total, there are
59, 306 training points and 691 testing points. We place the inducing points for each
method on a regular grid, and exploit Toeplitz structure in SKI for scalability.
Figure 4(b) shows empirical runtimes (on a log scale) as a function of inducing points
m in both methods, and Figure 4(c) shows the standardised mean absolute error

                                               15
                                                           3
                                                         10                                                  0.8
              0.2
                                                                                                             0.7




                                           Runtime (s)
              0.1



 Intensity
                                                           2                                                 0.6
                                                         10

                                                                                                      SMAE
               0                                                                FITC                         0.5

             −0.1                                        10
                                                           1
                                                                                SKI (cubic)                  0.4
                                                                                                             0.3
             −0.2
                                                           0                                                 0.2
                                                         10                                                        0      1       2        3
                0       1       2      3                  2500    3000   3500    4000   4500   5000           10         10     10        10
                            Time (s)                                        m                                           Runtime (s)
                    (a) Natural Sound                            (b) Runtime vs m                                  (c) Error vs Runtime

Figure 4: Natural Sound Modelling. We reconstruct contiguous missing regions of a
natural sound from n = 59, 306 observations. a) The observed data. b) Runtime for
SKI and FITC (log scale) as a function of the number of inducing points m. c) Testing
SMAE error as a function of (log scale) runtime.

(SMAE) on test points as a function of runtime (log scale) for each method.4 For
m ∈ [2500, 5000] the runtime for SKI is essentially unaffected by increases in m, and
hundreds of times faster than FITC, which does noticeably increase in runtime with
m. Moreover, Figure 4(c) confirms our intuition that, for a given runtime, accuracy
losses in going from GP kernel interpolation in FITC to the more simple cubic kernel
interpolation in the KISS-GP variant of SKI can be more than recovered by the gain
in accuracy enabled through more inducing points. SKI has less than half of the error
at less than 1% the runtime cost of FITC. SKI is generally able to infer the correct
curvature in the function, while FITC, unable to use as many inducing points for any
given runtime, tends to over-smooth the data. Eventually, however, adding more in-
ducing points increases runtime without increasing accuracy. We also made predictions
with SSGPR (Lázaro-Gredilla et al., 2010), a recent state of the art approach to scal-
able GP modelling, which requires O(m2 n) computations and O(m2 ) storage, for m
basis functions and n training points. For a range of m ∈ [250, 1250], SSGPR had
SMAE ∈ [1.12, 1.23] and runtimes ∈ [310, 8400] seconds. Overall, SKI provides the
best reconstruction of the signal at the lowest runtime.


5                   Discussion
We introduced a new structured kernel interpolation (SKI) framework, which gen-
eralises and unifies inducing point methods for scalable Gaussian process inference.
In particular, we showed how standard inducing point methods correspond to ker-
nel approximations formed through global Gaussian process kernel interpolation. By
changing to local cubic kernel interpolation, we introduced KISS-GP, a highly scalable
        4
   SMAEmethod = MAEmethod / MAEempirical mean , so that the trivial solution of predicting with the
empirical mean gives an SMAE of 1, and lower values correspond to better fits of the data.


                                                                           16
inducing point method, which naturally combines with Kronecker and Toeplitz alge-
bra for additional gains in scalability. Indeed we can view KISS-GP as relaxing the
stringent grid assumptions in Kronecker and Toeplitz methods to arbitrarily located
inputs. We showed that the ability for KISS-GP to efficiently handle a large number of
inducing points enabled expressive kernel learning and improved predictive accuracy,
in addition to improved runtimes, over popular alternatives. In particular, for any
given runtime, KISS-GP is orders of magnitude more accurate than the alternatives.
Overall, simplicity and generality are major strengths of the SKI framework.
We have only begun to explore what could be done with this new framework. Struc-
tured kernel interpolation opens the doors to a multitude of substantial new research
directions. For example, one can create entirely new scalable Gaussian process models
by changing interpolation strategies. These models could have remarkably different
properties and applications. And we can use the perspective given by structured ker-
nel interpolation to better understand the properties of any inducing point approach –
e.g., which kernels are best approximated by a given approach, and how many inducing
points will be needed for good performance. We can also combine new models gener-
ated from SKI with the orthogonal benefits of recent stochastic variational inference
for Gaussian processes. Moreover, the decomposition of the SKI covariance matrix
into a Kronecker product of Toeplitz matrices provides motivation to unify scalable
Kronecker and Toeplitz approaches. We hope that SKI will inspire many new models
and unifying perspectives, and an improved understanding of scalable Gaussian process
methods.



References
Baker, C. T. (1977). The numerical treatment of integral equations. Clarendon Press.

Chalupka, K., Williams, C. K., and Murray, I. (2013). A framework for evaluating
 approximation methods for Gaussian process regression. The Journal of Machine
 Learning Research, 14(1):333–350.

Cunningham, J. P., Shenoy, K. V., and Sahani, M. (2008). Fast Gaussian process meth-
 ods for point process intensity estimation. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning.

Hensman, J., Fusi, N., and Lawrence, N. (2013). Gaussian processes for big data. In
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI). AUAI Press.

Keys, R. G. (1981). Cubic convolution interpolation for digital image processing. IEEE
  Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 29(6):1153–1160.

Lázaro-Gredilla, M., Quiñonero-Candela, J., Rasmussen, C., and Figueiras-Vidal, A.

                                         17
  (2010). Sparse spectrum Gaussian process regression. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 11:1865–1881.

Le, Q., Sarlos, T., and Smola, A. (2013). Fastfood-computing Hilbert space expansions
  in loglinear time. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pages 244–252.

Lu, Z., May, M., Liu, K., Garakani, A., D., G., Bellet, A., Fan, L., Collins, M.,
  Kingsbury, B., Picheny, M., and Sha, F. (2014). How to scale up kernel methods to
  be as good as deep neural nets. Technical Report 1411.4000, arXiv. http://arxiv.
  org/abs/1411.4000.

Luo, Y. and Duraiswami, R. (2013). Fast near-GRID Gaussian process regression. In
  Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pages 424–432.

Naish-Guzman, A. and Holden, S. (2007). The generalized fitc approximation. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1057–1064.

Quiñonero-Candela, J. and Rasmussen, C. E. (2005). A unifying view of sparse approx-
 imate Gaussian process regression. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR),
 6:1939–1959.

Quinonero-Candela, J., Rasmussen, C. E., and Williams, C. K. (2007). Approximation
 methods for gaussian process regression. Large-scale kernel machines, pages 203–223.

Rahimi, A. and Recht, B. (2007). Random features for large-scale kernel machines. In
  Neural Information Processing Systems.

Rasmussen, C. E. (1996). Evaluation of Gaussian Processes and Other Methods for
  Non-linear Regression. PhD thesis, University of Toronto.

Rasmussen, C. E. and Ghahramani, Z. (2001). Occam’s razor. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NIPS).

Rasmussen, C. E. and Nickisch, H. (2010). Gaussian processes for machine learning
  (GPML) toolbox. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 11:3011–3015.

Rasmussen, C. E. and Williams, C. K. I. (2006). Gaussian processes for Machine
  Learning. The MIT Press.

Saatchi, Y. (2011). Scalable Inference for Structured Gaussian Process Models. PhD
  thesis, University of Cambridge.

Seeger, M. (2005). Bayesian Gaussian process models: PAC-Bayesian generalisation
  error bounds and sparse approximations. PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh.

                                         18
Shepard, D. (1968). A two-dimensional interpolation function for irregularly-spaced
  data. In Proceedings of the 1968 ACM National Conference, pages 517–524.

Silverman, B. W. (1985). Some aspects of the spline smoothing approach to non-
   parametric regression curve fitting. Journal of the Royal Statistical SocietyB, 47(1):1–
   52.

Smola, A. J. and Bartlett, P. (2001). Sparse greedy Gaussian process regression. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 13.

Snelson, E. and Ghahramani, Z. (2006). Sparse Gaussian processes using pseudo-
  inputs. In Advances in neural information processing systems (NIPS), volume 18,
  page 1257. MIT Press.

Turner, R. E. (2010). Statistical Models for Natural Sounds. PhD thesis, University
  College London.

Williams, C. and Shawe-Taylor, J. (2003). The stability of kernel principal compo-
 nents analysis and its relation to the process eigenspectrum. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 15:383.

Wilson, A. G. (2014). Covariance kernels for fast automatic pattern discovery and
 extrapolation with Gaussian processes. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge.

Wilson, A. G. and Adams, R. P. (2013). Gaussian process kernels for pattern discovery
 and extrapolation. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).

Wilson, A. G., Gilboa, E., Nehorai, A., and Cunningham, J. P. (2014). Fast kernel
 learning for multidimensional pattern extrapolation. In Advances in Neural Infor-
 mation Processing Systems.

Yang, Z., Smola, A. J., Song, L., and Wilson, A. G. (2015). A la carte - learning fast
  kernels. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.




                                            19
